Hello and welcome back! In this video
we're going to be keeping score and tracking
how well the player does, how well the play does in his
Laser Defender game. So, this is pretty simple, and it's all
stuff you've really done before. We're going to be tracking scores
through a ScoreKeeper.
We're going to be attaching the score to a Text UI element
in the scene, so that we can see what we've scored.
And we'll use the find function to grab
the score object, and
get the ScoreKeeper from the EnemyController. So, pretty
simple stuff! So really,
the first task we're going to do is creating the User Interface
for the score, and because you've got the experience for the User
Interface, I'm going to let you do that, let you start by
creating a User Interface for the score. What
do I mean by User Interface? Well, I just want to
create a piece of text, inside my game
scene, that will keep my score with a nice
font. So, I'll let you pause the video
and create your UI for the score in the scene, and
then together, we'll be wiring it up so that we can keep the
scores. See you soon!
So, let's get started with creating our
UI score! We're jumping out, and
here I want to create a new
new scene. I want a new text,
and we should see that it comes in with a Canvas and a
an Event System, as we expect it to. If we zoom out,
we can position the text where we want. So, I want it at the bottom
right of my scene, and
I'm going to make that a little bigger. Let's pick a
cool font! Right now, I don't have
a font loaded, any descent font. I've got BMblock, but
that's not the font I want. So, what I'm going to do is I'm going to just
into www.dafont.com, and I'm going to use the Batman
Forever font. I mean we've done this before, we've been to Dafont
and we've grabbed another font before.
And it's in my
Finder already, so I don't have to.
I've downloaded it in advance, it's here!
So, let me jump into Unity,
find it in my Finder, and then, I can drag and drop
the fonts into my
Font Folder, and now, we have two Batman Forever fonts!
Brilliant! So,
font that's your font material,
all the stuff we need for fonts! So now, I can jump back into
my text, change the font.
Ah, let's zoom in a little bit. I'm going to add the Batman
Forever font, to my text.
So, I've got the text here, I drag and drop the Batman Forever into the font
folder, and now we have a font. I'm going to add in
some placeholder text, which is just going to be some numbers,
and I'm going to change the Font Size
so it's nice and big. Here we go! Cool!
That sounds about right! And
I want to right align the text, so that it
grows from the right, so if I
have my font grow it grows in a nice way.
I'm not going to have a font more than this. I think that's not going
to be a score more than, so that's going to be a suitable
score. Let's keep it like that, that's good!
We've got a Font Size, we've got the line spacing.
Let's check the color. What does it look like
in the game space. It looks like that! Well,
I think it's OK! Maybe make it a little bit
brighter,
something like that! Maybe a little bit of a more interesting color.
I'm going to go for blue! I think that's kind of the theme of
the game so far, so let's make it a little bit blue
like that. I think that looks good!
So cool! Now, we've got the font in the game! It's time to
get it wired up to an actual
score. You know, we've got the score in the game.
In fact, let's rename it! Let's rename it Score!
And then, we can find it like that!
So cool! And now, we've got a score!
It's your turn again actually
it's now your turn to create the ScoreKeeper
Script. Now, we want a ScoreKeeper Script to keep track of the
score, obviously, and we've going to attach it to the score text.
We want two methods, which is Score(int point), so
score a number of points and reset. And the only thing it'll
do is add an
integer number of points to the score field.
You have an integer score field on your
ScoreKeeper. Every time you go score some points, it'll add that
to the field, and Reset () will just set that to 0.
And then, whenever the score is changed, whenever the score method
is called, we also want to change the score
text. Now, you know how to do all that, if you've
been going through the course so far. So,
this is now your job. Your job is to create the ScoreKeeper Script, that
whenever we call a method Score, it changes the score
both internally and on the actual
UI object. And when ever you press Reset, it sets it to
0 and resets it to 0 in the UI object
as well. So, go for it, and I'll see you very
soon!
How did it go? How did you manage? Now, here's how I'm going
to do it! I'm going to attach this ScoreKeeper Script
to the Score UI, and I'm going to use
the GameObject.Find("Score").GetComponent<Score
Keeper>() from my enemies
to call the Score () method. So, let's get
started! Let's see what we can do about that! So, the first thing I want
to do is, go to my Score, and add a
new component. I'm going to add
a new script. I'm going to call it ScoreKeeper.
And this
ScoreKeeper is going to be edited.
I want a public
integer
field called score, very original.
I don't want Start and Update methods. The only
methods I want are
going to be my void
Score
Points or...
ScorePoints
and this will take an integer number of points,
and this will add them to our score.
Alright! And
then, once we've done that one, once we've got a score method,
we want the Reset method
and that takes a new argument.
However, it simply resets the score
to 0, and I'm going to set the default
value score to be 0, because that's how we should
start. So, now we've got our ScoreKeeper! That's the barebones of our
ScoreKeeper, and that's what we're going to use to build on, to
create our score keeping system.
Right, so now how do we
keep the scores from the enemies? Well, the enemies
in the EnemyBehaviour, whenever we create an enemy, we're going to get
hold of that ScoreKeeper object,
and then, call it whenever we die to
score a number of points. So, the first thing the enemy needs is
in the script, a value for the score right. So, how much
is this enemy worth to my
player? So, that's going to be a public integer
and scoreValue
And I'm going to set it to about 100 per
enemy or maybe 150, so the number don't look so round.
And then, I'm going to, in my Start function...
So, I'm going to have to recreate my Start function.
In my Start function, I'm going to go
GameObject.Find
And I'm just really showing you another way of getting hold
of something dynamically, because we are creating those guys
at runtime. We don't really have a
way of passing the ScoreKeeper in the
Inspector, so we have to instead define it
dynamically, whenever we create our enemies.
So, it's going to be ("Score").GetComponent
and this GetComponent method is used so I'm actually making
sure that I'm talking to the ScoreKeeper component.
I don't want to talk to say, the transform. I want to
talk to the ScoreKeeper, and that will return an object of Start
of type ScoreKeeper, which is this thing here.
That way my enemies will immediately
update my ScoreKeeper. And I've forgotten to do something very important
here. We've forgotten to update the text,
so we'll need to be able to get the component of the text
in the Start function of my ScoreKeeper, and then, update that whenever we
change the score. So, let's go and do that now! So, we're in
Start, so let's recreate the Start method.
That takes in no arguments.
And inside the Start method, I'm going to go
GetComponent
and I want the <Text>
component. And you'll notice, not Texture but
<Text>, that this will throw an error because we
need to also include UnityEngine.UI
And now,
text will be included, and that should work as
expected. So, of course this GetComponent<Text>()
will return a text component, which we''ll need to keep hold of.
So, Text
myText; is...
Save it like that! And that's going to be
a private, we don't need to talk to the
public about Text, and then, we simply say
myText
is the <Text> component.
So brilliant! And now, when we
change the score... That's not ScoreKeeper! That just should be
score! What's going on here? That's score += points;
And we do myText
=
.text. So, we're changing the text of myText
and we're doing =
score
.ToString(); and that will change an integer into a string.
And we do the same on Reset! We
really do exactly the same on Reset.
So cool! Will this work? Well,
let's try that! Let's jump into our game, and let's press play
and see whether we can score anything!
So, the
first thing you'll notice is, the text is 999999,
which it suddenly should not be.
So, let's pause the game and see whether we're actually capturing
the ScoreKeeper score. And we're not! You can see in the Score
Keeper Script, the score here is 0.
Nothing is coming up in the Console, so something is going
off. What is going wrong? We're
not calling score at all, so let me make sure that that's the case,
by using my impressive
Debug message functionality
and doing ("Scored
points");
Save that! And then
in my EnemyBehavior... [laughs]
What have we not done in the EnemyBehaviour? Well, we never actually passed the
score to the <ScoreKeeper> did we? So, let's do that now!
Now, let's create a private ScoreKeeper!
And set that, when we retrieve it from the Score object.
We save it as a private variable.
Then, whenever we are shot,
which happens in OnTriggerEnter2D,
we will do scoreKeeper
dot
Score(scoreValue);
And you'll notice something! Score is red here,
and why is that? Well, my scoreKeeper is not
public on Score, so I need to make my method public.
I want to call them from another context, so both
Score and Reset will need to be public.
So cool! So, now if I jump back,
try that again.
Oop, all errors have to be fixed
before you enter Play Mode. Have I
forgotten something important here? It looks good to me.
Yes of course! scoreKeeper should have a lower case s.
We're talking about a scoreKeeper instance here. Right!
Let's go! Let's go!
Here we go! Now, I have an updating
score! Brilliant!
So, what do we need to do now? We've got
the score coming up. Now, it feels like a game right?
Now, it feels like you've got something you're aiming to
optimize! You've got a score you're aiming to beat!
This is exactly the beginning of your game, and now the parallax
effect in the background is giving it a really nice
feel. So brilliant! We have a score.
pretty simple stuff. Let's jump back into our code. I
only want to change one thing, which is I don't want 999999 to
be the default. I want 0 to be the default. So, instead of
putting it here I want to use a long number
in the actual scene, so I can
see what it looks like when there's a long number, and I can do things like
alignment, etc. I'm going to jump back into my code,
and in my scoreKeeper I'm just going to reset my
text, my score, to 0 on Start.
So, Reset();
Brilliant! And then, jump back, press play,
and we should start on 0
and we do indeed. And now, let's shoot some enemies,
get a good score,
and die. Awesome!
So, well done for getting this far! Well done for
actually managing to put the score together!
We've done this before, but it's nice to go over some stuff again.
And we're done! We're keeping the score, we've
attached it to the UI Element. We
can move on to some more interesting stuff. I will see you
in another video very shortly! Bye for now!